Konstantin Bajanov is one of the first to host witnesses in Russia to serve out a prison
sentence since the Supreme Court banned their organization's activity in 2017.
He was released from a prison colony on May 5, 2021.
Upon release, he was immediately transferred to a deportation holding center and then deported
to Ukraine.
He was deported because Russia had annouled his citizenship as a consequence of his criminal
prosecution.
Several charges were first initiated against Konstantin after Russian officers rated
seven homes of Czechoslovak's witnesses, including his on June 12, 2018.
After that, he was charged with extremism.
Eventually, Konstantin and five of his fellow worshippers were sent to a pretrial detention
center.
The FSB, the investigator and other operatives promised me that if I pleaded guilty and
began cooperating with them, they would guarantee me a suspended sentence and I would
not go to prison.
Konstantin refused to cooperate with the authorities, which would have meant compromising his
faith.
In total, Konstantin spent almost a year in pretrial detention followed by several months
of restrictions of certain activities while awaiting the court sentence.
He was accused of organizing the activity of an extremist organization.
The main accusation was based on the fact that he held a religious meeting in the winter
in January 2018.
People there read the Bible, sang spiritual songs, discussed how to live by Bible principles.
The investigator interpreted this religious meeting as a meeting of a legal entity that
was banned in Russia.
On September 19, 2019, the judge announced the verdict, three and a half years in a general
regime prison colony.
Every month later, the Court of Appeal upheld the sentence.
And on February 4, 2020, Konstantin was sent to the prison colony.
On February 8, 2020, I was taken to the colony, two correctional colonies, three in the
city of Dmitrovgrad, Ulyanovsk region.
I worked in the colony store.
I received a lot of letters and prison, an officer summoned me and said to me,
«Bajanov, we received 300 letters for the whole colony in a year, but you alone have
received over 300 letters in a month.
Who do you think you are?
Do you want our inspector to drown in these letters?
Well, I explained that people want to support me, encourage me, and comfort me in some way».
Konstantin spent a year and three months in a prison colony and was granted early conditional
release on May 5, 2021.
It was a happy moment.
I saw Irina, my wife, and we hugged.
The head of the prison division said, «Kostya, I didn't expect so many people.
I knew you had brothers and sisters, and the letters have been written to you, but it
still amazes me that so many people would come to meet you».
He concluded, «You must be a happy person».
When the day arrived for him to be deported, Konstantin received further support from his
fellow believers.
In the 19th of May, we arrived at the border.
They checked my documents and issued everything.
My brothers and sisters were there to meet me with the poster and flowers, and my dear
wife Irina was there.
It was such an unforgettable moment, how we saw and hugged each other.
Justice Jehovah promised to provide the way out of trials, so he did for me.
Indeed, he pushed all the barriers aside and made it happen so that my wife and I were
able to reunite on our wedding anniversary.
It brought us in measurable joy.